well think about when you have the flu
when you have the flu what do you feel
like doing absolutely nothing and do you
think that is psychological no obviously
it's not so why do you assume that when
you wake up in the morning and you don't
feel like doing anything why do you
assume that is completely a
psychological it's an incorrect
assumption
how can I help a friend who went through
therapy and medication and find it isn't
helpful so okay so like you guys have to
understand that you know as a friend you
guys are not responsible like for
someone else's mental health right so
like you shouldn't be there buckets like
in terms of what therapy and medication
are supposed to be helping you should
not like put yourself in that same
bucket so the support that you can
provide a friend is the support that a
friend provides and shouldn't be a
substitute for therapy or medication
practically what you can try to do is
maybe help them find like a different
therapist or psychiatrist or
psychologist so you can help them in
terms of like you know like helping them
find help and being supportive and
baking them cookies and calling them
when they're when they're feeling down
and talking to them and hanging out with
them getting them out of the house
visiting their twitch stream and telling
them to meditate when they get upset
these are all of the things that you can
do which means a lot like a lot of times
you know when we think about when I deal
with people who are suicidal it's not
like the most common reason why someone
who wants to kill themselves and doesn't
kill themselves is because of the other
people in their life it's because there
are people that matter to them they
themselves are willing to kill
themselves for their own sake it's just
the other people in their life that are
important to them that they don't want
to hurt that keeps them struggling and
wanting to live so that's your job right
your job is to be their friend your job
is to tell them that you care them care
about them you tell them that you love
them like that's not something that
their psychiatrist or therapist is gonna
tell them I mean they can sometimes
sometimes I say that to my patients but
and and so like you like they're not
therapy and medication isn't gonna give
you a sense of love I mean depends on
yeah it's not but you can so you can you
can be their friend you can hang out
with them you can like get them out of
the house like you guys can go workout
together y'all can go meditate together
all of those things and that's your job
so you can't help but just don't don't
think that you should be a substitute
for therapy or medication because you're
not okay
why does my depression get worse when I
find out someone who I don't know dies
such as juice world today who I'm not a
huge fan of and a girl from my hometown
I mean the short answer is that I don't
know but what I would say is that like
much like Gork so if we think about
gorks problem is like he has a certain
belief that's internal and when the rest
of the world
hops on to that belief like he's totally
fine with it
right like so he when when when his
twitch chat gets angry at him he like
that affects him so like it's kind of
like you have certain vulnerabilities
that the rest of the world is gonna kind
of tap into and so I would say that in
your case you know you have some
vulnerability about the world being like
full of you know like it's like a
hopeless place it's not just about you
but that there's like sadness in the
world or something like that and any
time the world kind of corroborates that
message the feelings within you return
so I want you guys to think about
depression a little bit like PTSD in the
sense that you know there's certain
things that trigger PTSD and there are
certain things that can trigger
depression in triggering isn't just a
part of deep PTSD it's just a part of
the way that the mind works like when I
walk into a bathroom so I don't know if
you guys have ever had this happen to
you but when you really need to use the
bathroom and you walk into the bathroom
like if you're in a public place and all
the stalls are occupied your need to go
to the bathroom gets way way worse it's
like you could hold it in but it's the
second you get into the bathroom you
need to like really really really go
right so it's like your body and your
mind are responding to the external
world and they're triggering you to need
to pee so in this person's case this
question is why does my depression get
worse when I find out someone who I
don't know dies it's because there's
something about the way that you view
the world or that you view other people
that's getting triggered by like these
random deaths
and then you get depressed so like that
that has more to do with the way that
your mind it's like a bias it's like a
way that you look at the world so I
don't know where that comes from but the
question is like why does it matter to
you you know let me think about this
how do I ask this yeah like what are
your general thoughts about the world
how do you find mental problems are
caused by physical illnesses like
diabetes and blood pressure okay that's
a great question
so mental problems are not caused by
physical problems like diabetes and
blood pressure well sometimes they can't
be but you guys have to understand that
the mind is connected to our body so
there are lots of studies that show that
for example when your depression gets
worse
that your arthritis gets worse that when
people feel anxious their GI system gets
messed up and there are some there's a
lot of fascinating research for example
on the gut brain access our bodies and
our minds are connected and there are a
lot of mechanisms through which these
are connected so I think my favorite
exploration of this is the field of
psychoneuroimmunology which is the
effect of our mind or the connection
between our mind psychology our brain
neuroscience and immune system
immunology psychoneuroimmunology there
are studies that show that if you're
depressed for example your body's
response to a vaccine is blunted
compared to like when you're not
depressed so your immune system and your
your mental like system are actually
like your mind are very closely linked
there are also studies that show that
people who are grieving are more
susceptible to viral illnesses so when
you lose a loved one your immune system
isn't functioning the way that it used
to so the body and mind are
intrinsically connected I think for you
guys the most important thing to think
about is circadian rhythm and cortisol
so when your circadian rhythm is off
your immune system tends to get off you
tend to get into like a pro-inflammatory
kind of state and when you're in a
pro-inflammatory state you kind of feel
shitty it was just like not a good word
for it you just feel [ __ ]
like your capacity to do things that you
know you should do just feels worse
right and like you're like oh man like I
should work out but I just don't feel
like it
I just don't feel like it is actually a
very complex physiological neuro
scientific and psychological response
there are lots of things that result in
you feeling like doing stuff so you kind
of say like oh I just don't feel like it
today
well think about when you have the flu
when you have the flu what do you feel
like doing absolutely nothing and do you
think that is psychological no obviously
it's not so why do you assume that when
you wake up in the morning and you don't
feel like doing anything why do you
assume that is completely a
psychological it's an incorrect
assumption if the flu can make you not
feel like doing stuff what other
physical things can make you not feel
like doing stuff so you should
understand that if you're in a generally
pro-inflammatory state you're not gonna
feel like doing stuff so what can you do
to get out of a pro-inflammatory state
you can do things like yoga or exercise
yoga superior to exercise in this by the
way but let's remember that the problem
here is that you can't do anything so
you're probably not gonna be able to do
yoga so what you should do is eat
anti-inflammatory foods so like
anti-inflammatory foods are the top of
list berries leafy greens not iceberg
lettuce but stuff like arugula spinach
cruciferous vegetables broccoli
cauliflower cruciform the vegetables
that look like they like bud out so all
of those things will help sort of reduce
your inflammatory burden and have
limited evidence to improve like
inflammatory conditions so someone is
joking about downing a [ __ ] ton of advil
there's actually a study so you guys
really ready for research Andy so you
jest
this is not the paper that I'm looking
for I have a better one I just can't
find it but that's a meta-analysis it's
just old there's a recent study I don't
know when there was a very good study
that came out within the last year
showing pretty good effects of using
anti-inflammatories to treat depression
right but absolutely so I don't think
you should take Advil if you're
depressed but it's ibuprofen um did
stream died for a second I don't know
okay so in your case eat cruciferous
vegetables think a little bit about you
know physically what you can do if you
don't feel like you're like doing stuff
and the mind and the body are
fundamentally connected so physical
problems are gonna make your mental
state worse and mental problems are
gonna make your physical state worse and
the cool thing is that since both of
them are connected you can do meditation
to improve your rheumatoid arthritis you
can do meditation to improve your blood
pressure and you can do physical stuff
to improve your depression you can eat
different things so that's like that's
cool right like you don't have to
actually just you don't have to like
combat you don't have to fight the
depression in the mental realm alone you
can actually just do physical stuff in
your depression will improve your
anxiety will improve okay what's the
difference between a psychiatrist versus
psychologists versus therapists so
psychiatrist is a medical doctor so I
went to medical school and you learn
about the physical body so like as part
of becoming a psychiatrist I worked in
the ICU of a hospital so I deal with
people who are like you know have septic
infections and have heart attacks
strokes you learn how to treat diabetes
you learn how to treat high blood
pressure you learn how to treat physical
stuff so you're a medical doctor you
even spent time in an operating room by
doing surgeries so that's a medical
doctor so a medical doctor who
specializes in the organ of the mind so
remember that medical doctors specialize
or many of them do right so you have
like pediatricians who specialize in
kids you have obvious
Trish ins or Gynaecologists who
specialized in pregnancy and female
health you have surgeons who specialize
in surgery and then you have
psychiatrists who are doctors who
specialize in the mind a psychologist is
someone who studies the mind exclusively
and the training for psychologists
oftentimes have a lot more research
involved so they learn a lot more about
science and research methodology
methodologies at least in the u.s.
because it's a it's a Doctor of
Philosophy usually so it's a PhD and
that's like a research degree
fundamentally you can get a PhD in
psychology or you can get a PhD in like
electrical engineering or computer
science so it's an academic degree that
with a particular focus in the mind so a
therapist can be at least in the United
States can be many things so a
psychiatrist can be if they're their
epistle does therapy or presumably
psychotherapy because you also have
physical therapists right so a therapist
is someone who does something called
like psychotherapy usually they're like
a counselor or a therapist and they can
have a variety of physical training
background so a social worker in the
United States can be a therapist a
psychologist can be a therapist and a
psychiatrist can be a therapist the
difference is that their training is
different so as a psychiatrist I trained
I went to four years of medical school
and then four years of psychiatry
training a psychologist usually trains
for between five and seven years with
like a one-year postdoc it depends on
how much research that they do and a
social worker trains for like two years
in the United States so their training
levels are gonna be different their
backgrounds are gonna be different you
know I like I attest can prescribe
medications most of the time
psychologists cannot because medications
are like a physical substance that you
put in your body and may interfere with
other medications so that's the
difference
okay so what exactly I see a couple
questions about procrastination quick
question how often do you plan to do
retreats and will you do retreats
outside the US how often do I plan to do
retreats I don't know we've had one
retreat that sort of happened like last
minute I was just like hey we should
have a retreat and our community was
pretty small then it was like maybe a
hundred people or 150 and about a dozen
people showed up and it was great
like we had a about 12 to 15 people who
regularly showed up on our discourse for
like like group like we would work
through stuff together and so like half
of them came to the retreat and so our
really our active community was like 15
people when are we gonna do another
retreat as soon as possible and what we
do retreats outside the US I certainly
hope so so all that stuff takes like
money and funding in time so I can pay
for you know one retreat a year like out
of my own pocket but as we make money on
stream and as you guys like sob and all
that kind of stuff like that that's all
gonna go to the retreat fund and we're
probably gonna do another retreat in the
US but it sounds like we need to do a
retreat somewhere and like Northern
Europe or Scandinavia because half the
people on stream are from like the
Netherlands or like Denmark or whatever
like Finland like so yes send us your
Amazon Prime subs so we yeah we want to
do more retreats for sure so I just
already I'm thinking if we do want to
internationally it's probably gonna be
somewhere in Europe okay so there's
something about expectations
procrastination commitment long term so
this is a question that I get all the
time on stream what are your thoughts on
using hallucinogenic drugs to treat
mental illnesses so I think that there's
preliminary evidence that is promising
that some substances when used in a
controlled fashion can be therapeutic
but don't take like I don't think people
should just start doing LSD or MDMA like
just because some studies show some
promising stuff like these are very
small studies like 20 people 50 people
and I think it's like you know if the
evidence supports that I'm open to it
but I think that it's too preliminary to
really tell what's what's good or what's
safe or what's reliable okay oh this is
a cool question I like this question
okay with ADHD you committing long term
okay what do I think about gene site
that's a very specific question so let
me just ask this one then we're gonna
switch to meditation okay so last mental
health question let me just scan real
quick actually there's a quick question
can you make the stream more EU friendly
it's pretty late and I don't want to
miss it yeah so like I think we stream
from 3 to 5 Eastern which i think is
like 9 to 11 in some parts of Europe and
I will do my best to make the stream as
EU friendly as possible but I have a job
and have two kids and things like that
so like there's some you know restraints
on my time yeah I know 3 a.m. like where
you guys are in in Europe right now but
we have a stream that normally starts
five hours before now so 2 a.m. means
that it'll be like 9 p.m. your time
right so and I'll try to scream earlier
in the day like I'll keep that in mind